INSTALL NOTES FOR LINUX
Jim Winstead Jr. - 4 August 1992

This file contains basic instructions for installing Linux v0.97 or
later.  More detailed instructions have been written by others.  Read
the Linux FAQ for some suggestions, and for pointers to other
installation documents. 

COPYRIGHT

Linux is NOT public domain software, but is copyrighted by Linus
Torvalds (torvalds@cc.helsinki.fi).  The copyright terms follow the
GNU Copyleft.  See the file COPYING from any GNU software package for
the finer points.  Note that the unistd library functions and all
library functions written by Linus Torvalds are exempt from this
copyright, and you may use them as you wish. 

WARNING

    The 0.97 root disk requires the 0.96b or later kernel, although
    the 0.97 kernel is strongly recommended.  A bootable image of this
    kernel should be available where you got the image for the 0.97
    root disk.

INSTALLATION

1)  First, and absolutely the most important step, MAKE BACKUPS OF YOUR
    SYSTEM!  This system won't do anything nearly as nasty as coredump all
    over your harddrive (see 386BSD v0.0), but it is quite easy to
    accidently screw something up while installing. 

2)  Test out the Linux boot disk with the Linux root disk.  If you are 
    unable to get the boot disk to work properly on your system, try 
    posting to comp.os.linux, or contacting Linus.

    Notice that Linux (as of v0.95) contains an init/getty/login suite,
    and this will start up 'login' on the first four virtual consoles,
    accessed by Left-Alt-F[1234].  If you experience problems on one
    virtual console, it should be possible to switch to another one.

3)  login as 'install', and the system will walk you through the
    process of installing Linux on a hard drive partition.  The
    process is fairly automated, but the process requires that you go
    through the steps of creating a partition for Linux usage.  Some
    tips follow:

	Read the fdisk file from the intro login, which will explain
	the basic concepts of hard disk partitions, and how to use
	fdisk.

	You may find it useful to login to one virtual console as
	intro, so you can access the on-disk documentation, and
	another as install, so you can do the installation and have 
	easy access to the documentation.

	The maximum size of a Minix filesystem (the type created by
	mkfs) is 64 megabytes.  This is not a limitation of mkfs or
	Linux, but a limitation of the Minix filesystem that is used.

	With the release of Linux v0.97, a new 'extended' filesystem
	has been released that supports 4 terabyte (!) partitions,
	and extended filenames.  The root disk does not contain
	utilities to use this extended filesystem, however, because
	the filesystem is still considered alpha code.

4)  You should now have a complete (but very basic) root filesystem on
    your harddrive.  To be able to boot from floppy with this as your
    root filesystem, you will have to edit the boot diskette.  This is
    done by modifying the word at offset 508 (decimal) with a program
    such as Norton's Disk Editor, or use pboot.exe (available where
    you got this file, the boot disk and the root disk, hopefully.)

    This word is in 386-order (that is, least-significant byte first),
    which means it should look like one of the following:

       LSB MSB	-	device
       --------------------------
	01 03	-	/dev/hda1	LSB = Least-Significant Byte
	02 03	-	/dev/hda2	MSB = Most-Significant Byte
	03 03	-	/dev/hda3
	04 03	-	/dev/hda4

	41 03	-	/dev/hdb1
	42 03	-	/dev/hdb2
	43 03	-	/dev/hdb3
	44 03	-	/dev/hdb4

    The numbers are in hex, and if you're editing the boot diskette by
    hand, these two bytes should initially be 00 00 (and are followed
    by two non-zero bytes).

    Note that pboot.exe predates Linux 0.95a, so some of the
    information it presents is inaccurate (it refers to the old hd*
    naming scheme).  The codes to use are as above, but with the most-
    significant byte first.  (So /dev/hda1 = 0301, /dev/hda2 = 0302, 
    etc.)

5)  You should now be able to boot from this diskette and it will use
    your new Linux partition as the root partition.  You'll notice,
    however, that you can't do a whole lot with just the programs on
    the root diskette.  You'll need to get further packages from
    whereever you got the root and boot diskettes, and read these from
    a floppy using pax and compress.

	(Simple instructions: Download the file to DOS, use rawrite to write
	the tar file to diskette.  Use 'dd if=/dev/fd[01] | uncompress | pax
	-rv' to read the file from floppy, where /dev/fd0 is your first
	floppy drive (A: under DOS), and /dev/fd1 is your second floppy drive
	(B: under DOS). 

6)  To reboot your machine when running Linux, you should use the
    'reboot' command.  This makes sure to flush all caches to disk, 
    and notifies other users that the system is going down (well, the
    last bit isn't real important).

    FAILURE TO DO THIS COULD RESULT IN BADLY CORRUPTED FILESYSTEMS.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------

These instructions are not the best, but should be enough to get you
going.  If you have more questions, either post on comp.os.linux, or
send mail to me (jwinstea@fenris.Claremont.EDU), or to Linus
(torvalds@cc.helsinki.fi).  Remember, the only stupid questions are
the ones that you don't ask.
